= RailsMachine

A small state machine for ActiveRecord models, built on top of Rails enums.

== Installation

Add to your Gemfile:

  gem 'rails_machine'

Requires Ruby >= 3.0 and ActiveRecord >= 7.0.

== Usage

Add an integer column to your model to hold the state:

  class AddStateToVehicles < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.0]
    def change
      add_column :vehicles, :state, :integer, default: 0, null: false
    end
  end

Include +RailsMachine+ and declare the machine:

  class Vehicle < ActiveRecord::Base
    include RailsMachine

    rails_machine do
      state :stopped
      state :idling
      state :driving
      state :broken

      init_state :stopped

      transition from: :stopped, to: :idling
      transition from: :idling,  to: :stopped
      transition from: :idling,  to: :driving
      transition from: :driving, to: :idling

      transition from: :any,    to: :broken
      transition from: :broken, to: :stopped, guards: [->(v) { v.inspected? }]
    end
  end

== States

States are stored as Rails enums. IDs start at 0 and increment by 1, or you can set them explicitly:

  state :stopped           # id 0
  state :idling            # id 1
  state :archived, id: 99  # id 99
  state :legacy            # id 100

You get all the usual enum helpers for free:

  vehicle.stopped?      # => true
  vehicle.idling!       # persists the transition
  Vehicle.stopped       # scope
  Vehicle.states        # { "stopped" => 0, "idling" => 1, ... }

Defining the same state name twice raises +ArgumentError+.

== Init states

+init_state+ declares which states a record is allowed to start in. Records saved with any other initial value fail validation.

  init_state :stopped
  init_state :broken   # multiple allowed

If no +init_state+ is declared, any state is accepted on creation.

== Transitions

Each +transition+ defines a legal +from+ → +to+ pair. Attempting an undeclared transition raises +ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid+ on save (or returns +false+ from +valid?+).

+:any+ is a wildcard:

  transition from: :any, to: :broken      # any state can become :broken
  transition from: :broken, to: :any      # :broken can become anything
  transition from: :any, to: :any         # no restrictions

== Guards

Guards are callables that receive the record and must return truthy for the transition to pass:

  transition from: :broken, to: :stopped, guards: [->(v) { v.inspected? }]

If every guard on every matching transition returns falsy, validation adds a +:guard_failed+ error.

== Custom column

Pass +column:+ to use something other than +:state+:

  rails_machine column: :status do
    state :draft
    state :published
    transition from: :draft, to: :published
  end

== Error messages

Validation failures add errors on the state column with these keys:

* +:invalid_init_state+ — record was created in a state not listed in +init_state+
* +:transition_not_found+ — no transition defined for the attempted state change
* +:guard_failed+ — a matching transition exists but its guard(s) returned falsy

Default English messages ship with the gem. Override them under +en.errors.messages+ in your own locale files.

== License

MIT.
